Hi everyone.
I'd like to introduce the next speaker.
Hi everybody.
We're going to be talking about tiles and some Dazz
le stuff.
For the folks listening on the stream, Haley is unable to
present, so we're going to do this instead.
I've got mic'd up.
So hi everyone.
Welcome to the slightly impromptu tiles talk.
I see people taking pictures.
Hi everyone.
So what you know, let's jump right in.
The idea is that I'm going to give like a pretty
short intro.
I've seen the faces here.
I think most of you already know what this is, but like
you know, at least I'm going to run through it pretty
quickly.
And then Ted and Nick or Ted or Nick or I don
't know, is going to like, I'm going to show some
really cool demos of stuff they've been building with tiles.
So what are tiles?
Well, they're really like, you know, they're confusing because they
're so simple.
It's, you know, what if you could have like a mini
web app as like so many have tried before that could be
embedded in anything safely because it can't touch the network.
That's essentially the whole story.
And the idea is that you remove a lot of power because
you remove network and that's significant for people who do, you
know, network things.
But this reduction in power makes it possible to use this in
many more contexts that are potentially security or privacy sensitive, such as
social media.
And so that is pretty cool, especially since the web is pretty
powerful.
So you can build like all kinds of stuff with these.
These are, you know, examples of like widgets of all kinds that
could easily be tiles.
And the thing is like, what's new about this?
Like many people have tried the web app thing before and well,
we haven't heard back from them in 20 years.
Like I remember like, if you're, if you're, if you
're, if you're, if you're really old like me, you
'll remember the XML packaging initiative that was trying to put like
XHTML and SVG inside some kind of thing
that you could run as an app and that, you know, all
that.
There have been every two to three years, the W3C
has some kind of workshop about web apps and like, really, maybe
guys, we could be solving this at some point, perhaps.
And there's progress every time, but it's pretty slow.
And of course, like, you know, you can always use ifr
ames if you don't mind like exfiltrating a
ton of information.
So, you know, this is something that, that, that's been tried
many times.
The things that, the thing that hasn't been properly tried is
just like cutting off the network.
And that's where things can, can, I think, get quite interesting.
And so the anatomy of a tile is basically, it's a
small secluded web runtime.
It can load things that are listed in its manifest.
One of the values of tiles is that they don't have
to be in a zip file.
Like a lot of the time, like a lot of these things
like widgets, I worked on W3C widgets and all that,
they had to be in a zip, which means that you can
only start showing something after you've loaded the whole zip, because
you don't know where the index is, you don't know
if you have all the resources you need, yada, yada.
If you have a video, your zip might be gigabytes big, it
's all, it's all problematic.
So that some people have tried to do stuff around that, but
it's usually not great.
In this case, you know, you load the manifest over 80, if
they are stored on 80, or you could load it over HTTP,
it's going to be pretty small.
And then dynamically setting up a service worker or something like that,
you see what you need to load.
And if you don't need to load everything, maybe you're
not watching the video that's included in that thing, that's
perfectly fine.
You could have like an entire archive of many things in a
tile without ever having to worry about it.
If we look at like basically, you know, this is a p
dsls of a tile that was published on 80 proto,
most of the fields are pretty straightforward.
If you look, if you've seen web app manifest, straight out
of web app manifest, there's like an icon, there's a
name, there's a description.
And one thing that's specific to tiles, and that really helps
solve this idea of like content addressable apps that you can
just like move around and publish in different contexts in a way
that's completely reusable, is that it has this resources thing that
maps proper web paths.
So like slash is mapped to this like blob of HTML, and
like slash image dot whatever is mapped to like a CID
of this.
And these things get to have proper HTTP headers.
In a lot of previous iterations of content addressed web things, the
headers were not included.
So you're getting the content, but without the HTTP headers, you
don't have the proper context, they might interpret differently in different
in different contexts.
And then you're like in a crazy world.
And so like, really, that's that's about it.
One of the things that's great is that this example shows
them stored on 80.
But you could store this anywhere, it really doesn't matter, because
everything's content addressed throughout the stack.
So you can put them in the car file, you can put
them over HTTP, you can load them with razzle, so
you can razzle dazzle, all of that's pretty
cool.
And so essentially, you know, that's, that's it, you know,
it's just like, it's this basically this small contained thing.
And what makes it interesting is when you start integrating it in
context and giving it extra power.
So the idea is that the embedding context can say like,
oh, hey, this tile actually, I know what's safe for it,
I can give it access to this specific thing that I've
controlled, and you're going to see a number of demos of
precisely that pattern in action.
But that's it, like, because you've removed the power, then
you can decide what you give to it.
And so I'm just going to go through a list of
like, and these are most of these are fakes, except for
a couple ones, of like, how to put them in different contexts,
like very simply, you could have a game in your social media
stream, just like in your feed, you're scrolling by, and they
're like, oh, yeah, look, Robin posted a game.
And like, this is me playing like, you know, like Mines
weeper in the middle of the thing, it can be
embedded, it's completely safe.
And now, you know, like, I hit the bookmark button, and
I've got a game installed, because they can just like, go
find it.
And then you could have like, some local curation of stuff.
And of course, because it's loading off a PDS, you
can paywall it.
So like, there's a business model even potentially behind that.
You can also do long form, I can give you the slides
afterwards, don't have to take pictures.
You can do long form.
So this is one of, this is a blog post I wrote
a while ago.
And so you could imagine that in a in the leaflet
kind of interface, instead of like, you know, create using the leaf
let editor, you could embed your own long form source that has
your own style and your own, you know, pictures, fonts, etc, just
like as part of the normal of the normal leaflet publication
format.
And you click that and it opens and and you just get
the blog posts.
Another thing that's interesting is you can have something called wishes.
So if any, if any of you are familiar with like Android
intents, or web intents, or stuff like that, it's
sort of a declarative way of saying like, hey, I'm
a piece of functionality, I'm a tile, and I need someone
to edit an image for me.
But I don't, I don't want to call a specific
program.
And I definitely don't want to do the thing where you
have to save the file to a file system.
And then the user has to like figure out what app they
want to use, and then give it back to me.
And I know that dance that's like fucking insane.
And so what you say is that is, is you say, hey,
I wish to edit.
So there's always a verb, this type of data, and here
's the data.
And it will find for you a tile that knows how to
carry out that wish.
And of course, maybe you have it installed, as we said earlier,
like bookmarking is installing, so that that's sufficient.
But maybe it's on the network, if it was published to
AT, you can know that it's able to, you can find
things that are able to handle specific requests.
So you can use the AT data itself.
And this is just an example of like, you clicked edit here,
and it loaded the image inside a filter editor, you know, why
not?
And then when you hit save, it sends it back.
And that's that is really simple, but you can integrate a
lot of things in this way with loose coupling.
This is an example of a tile in Rumi.
The idea, and I really love this pattern, I would love to
like, when you get to that part of like building stuff, I
would love to work on that.
The idea here is that you can give tiles, and Delta Chat
does that, you can give them a way to just write to
a data channel of the channel.
And so it shares data, but only with other people who are
on the channel.
So you can install a tile to a chat.
And what's cool about that, yeah, I know, it kind of
breaks the brain.
But like, if you think, if you think about it, like, a
chat is a pair is a security perimeter, right?
There are people who are inside the chat and can read stuff,
and people who are on the outside who can't.
And there's no reason that a chat would like only send
text messages.
Actually, they don't under the hood, they always send structured something,
right?
And so you send a different structured something that's just data
that like, and so you, you know, user installs a tile
to the chat room, every, everyone in the chat room gets to
see that tile.
And then the thing is, those things can post messages that are
basically CRDT that sync state across every instance of the
tile that people in the room see.
And so you can do something instead of like having all these
fucking doodle things that are always ugly, and like, you lose
the link, and you never know which one, you just like in
your chat, you just like drop a time picker thing where
you've like configured some options.
And anyone in the chat can answer, and it syncs the
options for everyone.
And you could do that with a document, you could have like
a shared markdown editor, like let's edit a doc together
in the chat.
So that's, you know, another thing.
Blento, you know, just like, this is like, almost like so
obvious that they, oh, man, sorry, sorry, the thing is, I don
't even know what these guys are going to say.
So sorry about that.
Let me go faster, that way.
This, this thing, this is like, what if we could render arbitrary
content by loading a tile that has a render wish.
And so imagine that you have like, whatever, this is like a
karaoke lexicon.
And inside of it, it has a status sphere lexicon,
and you just like want to arbitrarily render things, you could
load a tile that knows how to render this to like so
that you can do nested rendering of arbitrary embedded lex
ica.
And this one is actually my favorite, it looks like, ass like,
you know, most of the things I designed, but that's fine.
But like the idea here, and actually, I'm going to use
the real thing.
If I can find where the cursor goes, yes.
So the idea here is that they don't have to be
on AT proto, right, they can be inside a car file.
So you can have a local file that contains a tile that
you can run in something that's like a PDF viewer.
And so you could kill PDF, because like, you know, we should
kill PDF.
But like, we don't just kill PDF by reproducing PDF.
This is like, you know, this is basically a, this is a
presentation that I gave about tiles that was in the tile.
And so you know, you can you can do this, of course.
But the other thing that you can do is that you can
have self editing documents, because you can make it so that the
tile can write to a data segment in its own car container.
And therefore, you know, this is a rich text thing.
And I can say like, hi, folks, whatever.
And you see the little safe things here, if I close this,
and I email it to Ricardo, and he opens it in this,
and he doesn't have a rich text editor, he just has
the PDF replacement thing, then he can open it and edit it.
And you can you can do this with, you know, arbitrary editors.
So like, for instance, here, this MS paint, you know, and you
do this, and whatever.
And then you have an image editor that you know, I can
send it over to Ted, and he can edit the image and,
you know, yada, yada, yada.
And so with that, we have websites, we have a fake demo
shit browser on it.
There's a it's a dazzle spec because everything's
dazzle these days.
That's how you dazzle people.
And there's some some code that you can check out on
the wonderful npmx.
And you can come to our meetings, we share stuff.
Fuck yeah tiles.
And with this I
'm going to go ahead and see what is on my screen.
So let me just fix that.
Oh, I'm giving away the thing.
We're going to go fast.
This also is extremely unstyled, because we've been doing
this around organizing a conference.
So this is more of a tech demo, especially since Robin has
given you the dream in part, and shown a lot of like,
what we thought was really kind of cool about web tiles.
So I'm going to run through some of the stuff quickly,
and just kind of give you a sense of where once we
saw web tiles, what we immediately thought of, right, because the entire
pitch that Robin's giving is around having these self-contained
little tiles that you know that you can kind of pass around
safely, which I think is really an exciting idea.
And the notion of these things as pieces of context lists, content
addressed, signed data is really useful, especially when you start thinking, well,
okay, what if we reintroduced a little bit of context?
What context would you want to introduce?
And so we said, well, why not think about ways in which
you could actually gain access to that protodata directly through
this?
So what we've built is a platform for being able to
create and host web tiles.
And these things are, you know, as simple as something really goofy,
like an HTML page and some JavaScript, and they can be dragged
and dropped.
And there's a reason why I'm going with a super
simple example here first, because I want to be able to show
that these are things where if you want to handcraft something,
and just upload it, and make something tiny, quick, let's see,
hello, world clock, and we'll see you next time.
You absolutely can.
You can self-host, or you can upload these things, host them,
share them with other people.
These are embeddable, and our whole goal is to be
able to build a runtime that can provide a way to load
web tiles and connect with your app protocount simply and
easily.
So I'll switch between desktops here.
So this includes things like being able to just take an U
RI from, say, a desktop app, and also just load the tile.
And we've been talking about all the different places in which
we could stick and embed these, whether these are within web apps,
as Robin was pointing out, social feeds embedded inside of leaflet
posts or other sorts of data structures, where you can both be
confident of the safety and security of the app that you're
embedding, and still give users access to all of their data.
From there, though, this gets a lot more exciting.
We can do quite a lot of things with arbitrary access to
data, including crazy things like, why don't we build embedd
able media players?
This is data that is up on the protocol.
So part of the thing that we built is basically a R
azzle CDN as tiles are created and propagate through the
network.
We look at the CIDs because CIDs are
identifiers for both records and for blobs.
And we can serve them geographically.
We know that they are generally safe.
When you label a CID or an ATURI, you
know that it's not going to change, which means that you
have a certain guarantee of trust in the future.
And we can return that in chunked streaming forms in whatever
mechanisms are necessary for, you know, streaming audio, video, etc.
And so we can also define the security boundary here pretty easily
and simply to align with the affordances of the protocol, right?
Atproto has a capability model that allows you to define
a premium article.
Yeah.
So, for example...
And UCAN.
Yep, with UCANs and other sorts of things.
So this allows us to do some fun other things that build
on the work that we've been talking about for the past
year.
For example, being able to do gated content.
You could embed an article in, say, a social post that goes
and checks whether or not you have proof of purchase or a
subscription or a membership to a particular service.
And that actually will immediately unlock for you.
Or if you don't, right, you have a call to action
there directly.
And in this context, right, like maybe it's a call to
action to pay for the article.
And then you issue, you know, payment requests here, say, "Yes, I
'd like to pay for this." And then it actually goes, makes
an XRPC call, proves that you've got the signature,
and then loads the rest of the content directly for that record.
Over the past several months, we've, you know, I've published
quite a bit on how and why ProtoFans works
the way it works, attestations, and the whole concept that
you can have proof of payment, not web payments, but proof of
payment on record in structured ways.
Which means that if you are a content provider, like with the
better stack tile that we produced, your payment, your member base of
people who have paid for the one-offs or the subscriptions, they
follow you if you want to change payment providers or not.
If you want to change your PDS, or they change their
PDS, or any combinations of identity and data mobility, which is
central to the AdProto ethos, like this, this allows
and enables that.
Yeah.
And this isn't just about connections with your PDS either.
You can build and launch other services that can talk through X
RPC channels, and that can extend everything from like, little sessions
and being able to do real-time-ish experiences like, why don
't you give me a high five here?
Yeah, yeah, there you go.
High fives.
Oh, I got to send the, yeah, send the permission.
And so, you know, this provides the opportunity to do things like
actually doing games directly in feeds and other sorts of mini multiplayer
experiences.
What's really important to note that this isn't magical.
This tile is entirely sandboxed.
The tile itself is not making external API calls.
It's not, it's not breaking the boundary, right, that we
set from our security profile.
What it's doing is it's communicating with the runtime, whether
that runtime is the browser making XRPC, XRPC
requests that are authenticated and have the context of the user,
allowing for a stateless tile that is deterministic in nature,
thanks to content addressable storage.
But we have this global context of your PDS and the
XRPC calls that you can invoke.
So we can provide some structure around making, you know, queries and
procedures and WebSocket connections asynchronously to offer this experience.
Yep.
And so we have, um, a bunch of experimental runners, which we
have been tinkering with, like for example, this Rust, uh,
desktop based one.
So now we have a, uh, well, okay.
Don't have the permission for it.
All right.
Well, it's a little strict.
Sometimes there's a query string parameter to allow for create and
destruct methods.
So we'll go back to using the web, web version of
this.
Um, uh, uh, uh, and let's see, hello.
Uh,
these are all, um, individual aircrafts.
Hangar, uh, software is Han and Jared Ennis.
Yeah.
Just sort of fit.
And so, right.
Like these are a little full apps that can, you can, uh,
post and do anything you want with.
So, um, so, um, the, the two things, I mean, and Robin
's kind of given the game away here, but one of the
things that were no, no, it's perfect.
Like that was great.
Um, being able to talk about where we want to put all
of these tiles and how can we share these?
Um, my thesis around this is having good structures allow for people
to be able to experiment more.
And so, you know, I started out with like a little goofy,
um, app that you can like hand code if you want, but
also like, this is a great place to safely be able to
experiment with apps and plug, clawed in and say, go for
it.
Um, Um, you can read lexicons out of the, um,
lexicon garden MCP and give people capabilities to t
inker with data, have front end, um, capabilities on top of the
app proto stack and basically be able to, um, uh, grow the
types of things and the, the, the access to other communities for
building new apps.
To, to check the little agentic AI checkbox that's
now required everywhere.
Yeah.
The difference between an MCP application and a web tile is
the runtime.
So we right now there's this service is actually an MC
P.
So if you authenticate in and say, load the hello world
tile or load the create, the create post tile, it will use
the same structure, the same, the exact same runtime structure to make
XR authenticated XRPC calls from within your agent
to do things like create posts, make XRPC calls, et
cetera.
And that means that we have broad, broad distribution.
Anyone can say, Hey, I want to have an allow list of
tiles that are going into Rumi, or Hey, I want to
have a standalone website that displays some of this content and, and,
uh, has a runner that supports this payment method specific to this
content provider.
Right.
Uh, and that same tile can then work on a mobile device.
It can work on a desktop app.
You can have a local car file with a dual car, uh,
you know, basically data payload that you can give to someone else
to load that local data.
It's truly distributed content.
And we think that's pretty cool.
Let's bring back mixtapes.
Yes.
Um, okay.
We've got like a minute.
Any questions?
Okay.
This is awesome.
You guys, like I've wanted to do this 15 years ago.
Uh, so, uh, um, um, the, um, uh, basically what I wanted
to do is actually put charts, interactive charts or maps in a
feed.
Okay.
Um, my question is, uh, with regards to security, uh, so you,
uh, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm guessing you can
run a JavaScript here within, right?
So how does it cross boundaries with like, if there's content
security policy, how does that work?
Oh, yeah.
So basically, uh, when the tile runner, uh, gets a manifest, it
takes that content.
And because it's a CID that's recognized and listed
in the blob, the, the, uh, runtime is varying it down and
then it's loaded.
And that's the same way any assets are, are referenced as
well.
So like the image gallery one, could you pop that up?
Yep.
Um, image gallery, whether it's JavaScript images, media, et cetera, the,
the runtime is making these calls to determine what can be fed
into the, the sandbox.
The other thing about this is, um, each one of these tiles,
um, uh, the way that we host them is actually giving them
each a, um, their own subdomain, uh, based on the
CID.
So, um, they're actually sandbox based on origin.
Yeah.
Like a synthetic origin.
Yes.
A synthetic origin.
Yeah.
Non-deterministic to make it more difficult to, you know,
avoid two people somehow getting the rent, the same DNS and having
the chance that there's contamination.
You have a question.
Are you, are you using wishes in your message channel here or
a different type of messaging channel?
Cause tiles, maybe you can use it.
So it's, so wish wishes.
And please do correct me if I'm wrong here.
Wishes represent the intention of a user to take an action
that may involve other tiles.
This is, uh, this is adjacent to it and it's specifically
XRPC calls within the, the Ad Proto ecosystem.
So it's, it's not, uh, conflicting and could support it.
We could, we could look at what layering of tiles or navigation
or any, or the wishes concepts look like.
Uh, yeah.
That wishes are much more for the use case of like arbitrary
composition.
It's, it's, the idea is really task-based computing.
So you don't, you want your, your, your thing needs to
carry out a task.
It doesn't know who else can answer that task.
And then that means you have like open-ended composition, uh, instead
of having apps because apps suck.
Um, oh, and one, one small thing I wanted to add, I
didn't have time to add it to my presentation.
Some person I'd never met or interacted with, uh, the other
day on, on blue sky said, Oh, this seems interesting.
I'll integrate it.
And then the following day they shipped a server based browser that
supports tile.
So, you know, it's coming.
That's awesome.
For clarification, I was asking so that people would know you don
't have to use wishes.
You can use all kinds of things.
Uh, is hanger open source?
Uh, parts of it are, yeah.
Uh, we, we intend on open sourcing parts of it.
Um, but, uh, there's a bunch of different components that were,
yeah, we, we think that there's, um, potential value to the
community ecosystem to, uh, open source, both the runtime and the CD
N, uh, but then make some of the extra PC services specific
to payment processing or other things, you know, the secret sauce of
how this thing can like sustain itself.
Okay.
One last question.
I think we got to wrap up.
Yeah.
Um, forgive my ignorance.
This is the first time I've ever heard of web tiles.
Is this a W3C?
Is this supported in all browsers?
Is this a wasm thing?
What is the runtime, I guess?
Uh, so I, I mean, it, it, this is not a W
3C thing, but like the runtime is like a web runtime.
So it's, it, it, it works in the browser.
Um, the, the container itself is not a W3C standard.
It's a dazzle standard.
So, I mean, if you want to call dazzle standards, but
like it's, it's along the same suite of stuff that
powers the rest of 80.
Yeah, no, this is, this works in the browser today.
Yeah.
And, uh, the, the key things here are web tiles are standard.
Um, the runtime that we're talking about is a thing that
loads web tiles and has the message channel for being able to
connect to your app proto account.
Um, or, uh, yeah, I, I think there's a lot of
room to standardize and create more formality around what runt
imes do and don't support.
Um, and the Maslow documents is, is actually, it's, it
's, it's simple and plain complimentary, right?
It, it does exactly what you'd expect by defining what resources
we're using CIDs, uh, content addressable storage references
or links, uh, to, to tell you what it needs to load
and how, and then it's up to the runtime to implement
it.
So think of it as like the PDS is a collection
of XRPC services.
It's not really a formal spec, but you do have a
general shape of what it looks like.
It's very similar.
And, and also like generally, I mean, the way we do specs
and dazzle, we do small specs that do one thing, do
it well.
And that way you implement what you need to implement for that.
So like the tile spec is like tiny and it's just
tiles, but like the wishes spec is going to be separate from
that.
And like it, it's only wishes you could do like task-
based computing in other contexts.
Um, but also, um, uh, you know, various environments.
So for instance, I, I demoed, like I demoed, like
I showed like roomie integration, you could have a, a chat
context integration.
And like, if roomie integrates it and say, I'm
making this up matrix integrates it, you could use the same
tiles in both.
Yeah.
We're like 10 minutes, 10 minutes into the one minute.
We're, we're now in the bonus round.
Um, this is the coffee break.
So please be free should you want to be.
Um, otherwise, if you would like to talk about tiles more, let
's go.